docs: add AutoGrid article (#2836)
vaadin/docs: articles/react/components/auto-grid/index.asciidoc

---

> title: Auto Grid

Reviewer: Show on top of components list.
```suggestion
title: Auto Grid
order: 10
```

> tab-title: Usage
> layout: tabbed-page

Reviewer: No need for a tabbed page since we only have one tab.
```suggestion
```

[source,typescript]
.Auto Grid with the example `ProductService` backend
----
include::{root}/frontend/demo/component/auto-grid/react/auto-grid-basic.tsx[tags=apply-backend,indent=0,group=React]
----

Auto Grid loads the data lazily by calling the `CrudService<T>.list(Pageable pageable, @Nullable Filter filter)` method. The backend should sort, filter, and paginate the data according to the call arguments.

In addition to the service, Auto Grid extracts column definitions using the metadata from a Hilla generated model class specified by the `<AutoGrid model{}/>` property.

### Using Spring Data JPA

If you use Spring Data JPA on the backend, you can integrate a JPA repository with Auto Grid by subclassing from the `dev.hilla.crud.CrudRepositoryService<T>` class as your Hilla browser-callable service.

[source,java]
.Example JPA repository
----
include::{root}/src/main/java/com/vaadin/demo/fusion/crud/ProductRepository.java[tags=snippet,indent=0]
----

[source,java]
.Example JPA based data service
----
include::{root}/src/main/java/com/vaadin/demo/fusion/crud/ProductService.java[tags=snippet,indent=0]

> ----

Reviewer: ``` suggestion
## Basic Usage

Auto Grid requires a Java service that implements the `dev.hilla.CrudService<T, ID>` interface. In this example, the `ProductService` class implements the interface based on a Spring Data JPA repository.

[.example]
--
[source,java]
.ProductService.java
----
include::{root}/src/main/java/com/vaadin/demo/fusion/crud/ProductService.java[tags=snippet,indent=0]
----
[source,java]
.Product.java
----
include::{root}/src/main/java/com/vaadin/demo/fusion/crud/Product.java[tags=snippet,indent=0]
----
[source,java]
.ProductRepository.java
----
include::{root}/src/main/java/com/vaadin/demo/fusion/crud/ProductRepository.java[tags=snippet,indent=0]
----
--

Hilla automatically generates TypeScript objects for each `@BrowserCallable` service implementing the `CrudService<T, ID>` interface. These TypeScript objects have callable methods that execute the corresponding Java service methods, enabling CRUD operations on the data.

For the `ProductService` example, you can import the generated TypeScript object in your React view, and use it as a value for the `<AutoGrid service={}/>` property to display the data in a lazy-loaded sortable grid with columns for all the properties of the `Product` entity.

[source,typescript]
----
include::{root}/frontend/demo/component/auto-grid/react/auto-grid-basic.tsx[tags=snippet,indent=0,group=React]
----

The Auto Grid component will render a grid with columns for all the properties of the `Product` entity, loading the data lazily from the backend by calling the `CrudService<T, ID>.list(Pageable pageable, @Nullable Filter filter)` method.

This is what the rendered grid looks like:

[source,typescript]
----
include::{root}/frontend/demo/component/auto-grid/react/auto-grid-basic.tsx[render,tags=snippet,indent=0,group=React]
----
```

## Customizing Columns

To choose which of the data properties should be displayed as columns in Auto Grid, and to specify the column order, set the property names to the `visibleColumns` property.

The following example uses only the `category`, `name`, and `price` properties in this order.

[source,typescript]
.Auto Grid with chosen columns
----
include::{root}/frontend/demo/component/auto-grid/react/auto-grid-visible-columns.tsx[render,tags=snippet,indent=0,group=React]
----

## Filtering

Auto Grid supports filtering by using the criteria specified by the `filter` property.

> In the example below, the data in Auto Grid is filered using the contains matcher for the `name` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, the data in Auto Grid is filtered using the contains matcher for the `name` property.
```

---
title: Auto Grid
order: 10
---

:experimental:

:react:

= Auto Grid

// tag::description[]
Auto Grid is a component for displaying tabular data based on a Java backend service.
// end::description[]

## Basic Usage

> Auto Grid requires a Java service that implements the `dev.hilla.CrudService<T, ID>` interface. In this example, the `ProductService` class implements the interface based on a Spring Data JPA repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auto Grid requires a Java service that implements the `CrudService<T>` interface. In this example, the `ProductService` class extends `CrudRepositoryService<T, ID>`, which in turn implements the `CrudService<T>` .
```

Now the sentence is accurate. But the whole example is very complicated and confusing now.
